Getting Started Documentation (#15)
Xilinx/systemctlm-cosim-demo: docs/getting-started-guide.md

> # How to set up and run the Co-Simulation Demo

Reviewer: There are a few demos in this repository, maybe call out the specific one you're show casing.  Then add a ditta/dot diagram(whatever github is most happiest with) that shows how all the parts of the demo come together.  Below that you can then note what tools and purposes each part has.
By adding that visual and outline, the rest of this setup/execute sequence should be easier to follow.  You may even want to breakout the steps and elaborate as you go.

Author: This is a great idea since many people would be able to better visualize what is happening. We are working on some other basic diagrams so we could possibly repurpose those.

> # How to set up and run the Co-Simulation Demo

Reviewer 2: Hi, thanks for this piece of work! Excellent start! I agree with the comments given by @rc-matthew-l-weber and some comments from me are found below. My first comment is to rename this file to include Zynq7000 in the name somehow perhaps as: zynq7000-getting-started-guide.md.

> This demonstration shows how to compile and run the Co-Simulation demo of Buildroot in QEMU with a simulated device in SystemC. This configeration is tested working for Ubuntu 18.0.4 and assumes that `cosim` is located in your home directory. This walkthough also assumes the device being emulated is the Zynq-7000 SoC.

Reviewer: Using Buildroot to make the OS environment is just one way to set up that part.  For this example, it might be worth noting that Buildroot was selected so that a pure upstream Linux kernel can be built and deployed in QEMU.  This keeps the setup simple and shows how there isn't anything Petalinux specific in creating a complete solution.  (I left you guys to reword this part of it, I proposed some other clarification below for the second half of this intro)

Author: That is a good distinction. All of this should also be compatible with Petalinux or any other env in theory.

> This demonstration shows how to compile and run the Co-Simulation demo of Buildroot in QEMU with a simulated device in SystemC. This configeration is tested working for Ubuntu 18.0.4 and assumes that `cosim` is located in your home directory. This walkthough also assumes the device being emulated is the Zynq-7000 SoC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This demonstration shows how to compile and run the Co-Simulation demo of Buildroot in QEMU with a simulated device in SystemC.  This configuration is tested working for Ubuntu 18.0.4 and assumes that a `cosim` directory is created in your home directory. This walkthrough also assumes that the device being emulated by QEMU is the Xilinx Zynq-7000 SoC.  This SoC seemed like a good candidate but the concept can apply to any QEMU machine which plugs in a compatible remoteport bus interface.
```

## Dependencies
Below are the dependencies needed to compile all the libraries in this demo:
```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install cmake gmake gcc qemu-kvm qemu-system qemu-user-static verilator
```

## Setup and Compilation
Run these commands to clone and build the necessary repos (`~/cosim` assumed as the base directory).

### Create the base directory
```bash
mkdir ~/cosim
```

### SystemC Setup
```bash
cd ~/cosim
SYSC_VERSION=systemc-2.3.2
wget https://www.accellera.org/images/downloads/standards/systemc/systemc-2.3.2.tar.gz
tar xf ${SYSC_VERSION}.tar.gz && cd ${SYSC_VERSION}/

# Build and install the binaries
CXXFLAGS=-std=c++11 ./configure ; make

> sudo make install

Reviewer 2: Perhaps not using the the SYSC_VERSION and moving the comment to the top is more clear:

```
# Build and install the binaries
$ cd ~/cosim
$ wget https://www.accellera.org/images/downloads/standards/systemc/systemc-2.3.2.tar.gz
$ tar xf systemc-2.3.2.tar.gz
$ cd systemc-2.3.2/
$ CXXFLAGS=-std=c++11 ./configure --prefix=/usr/local/systemc-2.3.2
$ make
$ sudo make install
```

```

### QEMU Setup
```bash
cd ~/cosim
git clone https://github.com/Xilinx/qemu.git
cd qemu
git checkout 7e3e3ae09af8abe70383a5
git submodule update --init dtc

# Configure and build
./configure --target-list="arm-softmmu,aarch64-softmmu,microblazeel-softmmu" --enable-fdt --disable-kvm --disable-xen

> make

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make -j$((`nproc`+1))
```

Author: This is a good suggestion for ensuring people who copy and paste the commands can take advantage of faster compilation but overall it adds complexity to a demo that is trying to lay everything out in simple terms. Do you think it provides enough benefit to outweigh the complexity it adds?

sudo make install
export SYSTEM=/cosim/systemc-2.3.2/
```

### Demo Setup
```bash
# Clone the repo and the submodules
cd ~/cosim
git clone https://github.com/Xilinx/systemctlm-cosim-demo.git
cd systemctlm-cosim-demo
sed -i 's~../libsystemctlm-soc.git~https://github.com/Xilinx/libsystemctlm-soc.git~g' .gitmodules
git submodule sync --recursive && git submodule update --init libsystemctlm-soc

# Create the Makefile configeration
cat << EOF | tee .config.mk
CXXFLAGS=-std=c++11
SYSTEMC_INCLUDE=${HOME}/cosim/systemc-2.3.2/src

> SYSTEMC_LIBDIR=${HOME}/cosim/systemc-2.3.2/src/.libs

Reviewer 2: If the `--prefix=/usr/local/systemc-2.3.2/` is used when configuring the systemc-2.3.2  build we should be able to remove above two lines. The Makefile will pick up above as default location through this portion:

```
...
SYSTEMC ?= /usr/local/systemc-2.3.2/
SYSTEMC_INCLUDE ?=$(SYSTEMC)/include/
SYSTEMC_LIBDIR ?= $(SYSTEMC)/lib-linux64
...
```

Reviewer 3: Installing the systemc libs in ${HOME}/cosim is probably safer as an example since the user may not have access to /usr/local/. But I think we need to include --prefix=${HOME}/cosim/ in the command-line to configure.

Author: @edgarigl I agree, a home install would likely make this walkthrough more accessible.

Author: After a conversation with @rc-matthew-l-weber for the sake of the demo and ease of use, we install in the `--prefix=/usr/local/systemc-2.3.2/` I did add a note about also being able to install it in the home directory if they so choose

HAVE_VERILOG=n
HAVE_VERILOG_VERILATOR=n
HAVE_VERILOG_VCS=n
VM_TRACE=1
EOF*

# Build the demo

> make

Reviewer 2: In case the zynq_demo is the only one to be built one can do `make zynq_demo`.

```

### Buildroot Setup
```bash
cd ~/cosim
git clone https://github.com/buildroot/buildroot.git
cd buildroot
git checkout 36edacce9c2c3b90f9bb11
mkdir handles
```

> For this walkthough we will be configuring the demo to emulate the Zynq-7000 SoC. The `.dtsi` files available in the Xilinx repositories need significat modification to operate.

Reviewer: Not sure I would say that they need a lot of mods like that.  Since you staged the files below, maybe put them in a `support-files` folder and then update this section to pull from that.  Additionally, move the wget's into the headers of the actual dtsi files to show the origin of those files and then comment on what had to change in each respectively.

Reviewer 3: Thanks, yes, I agree with the comments. It would be nice if we could avoid carrying a copy of the dtsi files in this project.

The idea with the zynq-pl-remote-port.dtsi file in the qemu-devicetrees is to act as an overlay (or an example of an overlay) for a zynq-7000 dts file. If you could provide a diff of the changes you had to do to the dts file, perhaps we can make those changes in the original repository.

Ideally, here we could just do a bunch of wgets to get hold of dts files and a line compile the final dtb (perhaps with a small modification to get zynq-pl-remoteport.dtsi included).

Reviewer 3: One more thing that may be causing confusion.

QEMU for the Zynq-7000 takes two DTBs as input, -dtb and -hw-dtb.

If only -dtb is passed, that file is used as both the -dtb and -hw-dtb.

-hw-dtb is used by QEMU to instantiate the machine.
-dtb is passed to the ARM Linux kernel.

This means that the -hw-dtb should include the zynq-pl-remoteport.dtsi but the -dtb should not.

On the opposite side, -dtb should include the amba_pl peripherals implemented in the programmable logic (e.g whatever IP you're cosimulating with) so that Linux drivers can bind. The -hw-dtb file should not include those descriptions.

Author: I agree, that would be a better way of including those files. We were just attempting to make it as close to plug and play as possible. I can take a look at the diffs and see how substantial they are.

Author: @edgarigl Are you referring to the [linux-xlnx repo](https://github.com/Xilinx/linux-xlnx) repo or [device-tree-xlnx](https://github.com/Xilinx/device-tree-xlnx)?

Reviewer 3: Hi,

Ideally, it should work to:
1. wget arch/arm/boot/dts/zynq-zc702.dts from upstream Linux (e.g https://github.com/torvalds/linux.git) or an equivalent dts from the Xilinx repos you mention. Build and use this as -dtb option to QEMU.
2. Remove existing amba_pl nodes from the dts (if any).
3. Add a line at the bottom of the dts so that it includes the zynq-pl-remoteport.dtsi overlay from https://github.com/Xilinx/qemu-devicetrees.git. Use this as the -hw-dtb option to QEMU.

Does that make sense?

Best regards,
Edgar

Reviewer 3: It's a good point with the plug and play though. An option is to create a script that automates the steps. Perhaps also to include the generated dts files in a sub-directory as Matthew suggested. From my side, I'm open to suggestions on what you guys think is the best way.

# Setup the Buildroot compilation configeration
rm .config .config.old  -f
cat << EOF | tee ".config"
BR2_arm=y
BR2_cortex_a9=y
BR2_ARM_ENABLE_NEON=y
BR2_ARM_ENABLE_VFP=y
BR2_TOOLCHAIN_EXTERNAL=y
BR2_TOOLCHAIN_EXTERNAL_BOOTLIN=y
BR2_TOOLCHAIN_EXTERNAL_BOOTLIN_ARMV7_EABIHF_GLIBC_STABLE=y
BR2_TARGET_GENERIC_GETTY_PORT="ttyPS0"
BR2_LINUX_KERNEL=y
BR2_LINUX_KERNEL_CUSTOM_VERSION=y
BR2_LINUX_KERNEL_CUSTOM_VERSION_VALUE="5.4.75"
BR2_LINUX_KERNEL_USE_ARCH_DEFAULT_CONFIG=y
BR2_LINUX_KERNEL_UIMAGE=y
BR2_LINUX_KERNEL_UIMAGE_LOADADDR="0x8000"
BR2_LINUX_KERNEL_DTS_SUPPORT=y
BR2_LINUX_KERNEL_CUSTOM_DTS_PATH="zynq-7000.dtsi  zynq-zc702.dts zynq-pl-remoteport.dtsi"
BR2_TARGET_ROOTFS_CPIO=y
BR2_TARGET_ROOTFS_CPIO_GZIP=y
BR2_TARGET_ROOTFS_EXT2=y
#BR2_TARGET_ROOTFS_TAR is not set
EOF

# Build
make clean && make olddefconfig
./utils/br/make
```

## Running the Demo
In order to run the co-simulation demo, you will need two shells open. One for QEMU and the other for SystemC. In the first shell navigate to the `systemctlm-cosim-demo` directory (`cd ~/cosim/systemctlm-cosim-demo`). This command will start the SystemC simulation:
```bash

> LD_LIBRARY_PATH=~/cosim/systemc-2.3.2/src/.libs/ ./zynq_demo 	unix:${HOME}/cosim/buildroot/handles/qemu-rport-_cosim@0 1000000

Reviewer 2: If the `--prefix=/usr/local/systemc-2.3.2/` is used when building systemc-2.3.2. above becomes:

```
LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/local/systemc-2.3.2/lib-linux64/ ./zynq_demo unix:${HOME}/cosim/buildroot/handles/qemu-rport-_cosim@0 1000000
```

```

Start the QEMU instance in the second shell by running (in any directory):
```bash
${HOME}/cosim/qemu/aarch64-softmmu/qemu-system-aarch64 -M arm-generic-fdt-7series -m 1G -kernel ${HOME}/cosim/buildroot/output/images/uImage -dtb ${HOME}/cosim/buildroot/output/images/zynq-zc702.dtb --initrd ${HOME}/cosim/buildroot/output/images/rootfs.cpio.gz -serial /dev/null -serial mon:stdio -display none -net nic -net nic -net user -machine-path ${HOME}/cosim/buildroot/handles -icount 0,sleep=off -rtc clock=vm -sync-quantum 1000000
```

## Example Output

> Below is some example output showing the Buildroot instance quererying the SystemC simulated evironment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is some example output showing the Buildroot instance querying the SystemC simulated environment:
```

```bash
Welcome to Buildroot
buildroot login: root

> # devmem 0x40000000

Reviewer: Maybe describe above what these offsets represent and what you're observing?  i.e., is it a counter?  Additionally, it might be good to add an example of an offset you could write/read back from.

Author: This is a good note. We currently don't really describe these _magic numbers_. If I remember correctly, to write we might need to make further additions but this would be a good addition. I believe we were going for documentation as is, then looking to maybe expand.
